---
layout: single
title:  "The accidental maximalist: Or, what's so minimal about minimal editions?"
permalink: /tei2024/
date:   2024-10-09 11:30:00 -0300
comments: true
excerpt: "This is the text of a talk I gave at the Text Encoding Initiative Conference in Buenos Aires (TEI2024). I describe the project management challenges and decisions made pertaining to an online pedagogical edition, Personal Correspondence of the Rutgers College War Service Bureau. As this is a bilingual conference, I've published my remarks here so that attendees can use the translate feature of their browsers to switch the text to their language."
gallery:
  - url: ./assets/images/wireframe_1.png
    image_path: ./assets/images/wireframe_1.png
    alt: "Location access wireframe"
    title: "Location access wireframe"
  - url: ./assets/images/wireframe_2.png
    image_path: ./assets/images/wireframe_2.png
    alt: "Subject access wireframe"
    title: "Subject access wireframe"
  - url: ./assets/images/wireframe_3.png
    image_path: ./assets/images/wireframe_3.png
    alt: "Date access wireframe"
    title: "Date access wireframe"
categories:
  - talks
  - pedagogy
---

## Abstract

Minimal editions have become popular because they answer the problem of curating texts under a set of constraints. However, encoding and publication workflows, even for minimal editions, run the risk of becoming bloated if the editor loses sight of the project’s priorities. Over a project’s life cycle, it is normal that these priorities will shift under the pressure of this or that constraint or challenge. Several authors have noted that minimal computing stacks displace complexity away from users and onto the editor or technical partner (Dombrowski 2022; Giannetti 2019; Hughes 2016). Identifying the *necessary* technical complexity is rarely easy. I focus on the latter two of Risam and Gil’s four-question heuristic for minimal computing—“what must we prioritize?”; and “what are we willing to give up?”—in order to demonstrate the importance of reengaging with these questions as new challenges come to light (Risam and Gil 2022).

With the Personal Correspondence from the Rutgers College War Service Bureau, I initially made choices consonant with a minimal approach. The edition navigation replicated the file structure of the archival collection, organized by the name of the alumnus serving in World War I. The project schema exhibited straightforward choices regarding the encoding of people, places, and events. However, the plan to capture biographical information on each Rutgers person mentioned nearly ran aground when a single soldier mentioned fifty classmates in his letters. A desire for a more enriching reader experience led to a choice to provide subject access to the letters, which in turn brought classification and UI difficulties. In this case study, I provide substance to the hard decisions editors face amidst evolving priorities and the need to curtail some plans. Documentation of best practices in this area will serve other editors who must make pragmatic choices in the service of local knowledge production.

## Short Paper

What is a minimal edition? It might mean more than one thing at a time. For some, it will mean a digital edition built using a minimal computing approach, by which I mean editorial projects that focus on necessities and reduce technological and resource dependencies. For others, a minimal edition will denote an editorial approach, with the goal of creating something like a reading edition of a text, which is to say a singular text, possibly accompanied by explanatory notes (Vanhoutte 2009). In yet a third case, a minimal edition could mean both things at the same time. This is the definition I am using to describe my approach to an online pedagogical edition: the [Personal Correspondence from the Rutgers College War Service Bureau](https://rutgersdh.github.io/warservicebureau/). Using a four-question heuristic proposed by Alex Gil and Roopika Risam as a launching point, I will take us on a project management journey through wants, needs, uncertainties, wastes of time, challenges, and some victories (Risam and Gil 2022). Without someone or something to hold us accountable, a minimal approach to a text can easily balloon to a maximal one when wants get in the way of outcomes. Regularly engaging with the questions---"what must we prioritize?" and "what are we willing to give up?"---has been key to pushing through various impasses. In this talk, I will describe a few of these challenges, and compare my choices to those of editors of other minimal editions to contextualize the choices at each stage of the project. I will conclude with a few observations that I hope will assist editors facing similar challenges.

The records of the Rutgers College War Service Bureau is a collection of university records from the period of US engagement in World War I. The records include correspondence between the director and Rutgers men serving in the war. My involvement in the project began when digitization was complete; my role was to create opportunities to engage student researchers with the digitized materials. Given my background in text encoding, I naturally thought of a digital edition. In a first iteration, the editorial project began as a two-week text encoding segment in a survey course called Data and Culture, which introduced undergraduate students to a range of digital humanities methods. My (overambitious) plans involved encoding a letter first, and visualizing letter metadata next. In practice, we only made it to the first stage. The two-week format was too short for students to learn enough of the method or the history to produce good encodings, although they did learn something of the collection and how humanists might study it. I continued the project in a different configuration with semester-long student interns and library school students interested in project work combining archives and technology. Having a full semester was much more congenial to the work, and as students completed more and more letter anthologies associated with different Rutgers alumni, I as editor became more focused on the potential scholarly angles to knit together a singular work from these disparate pieces. This order of events runs counter to the typical development, I will admit. Most editors go from digitization, to research, and then end with pedagogy (McGann 2001). I backed into the research interest a bit late in the project's development, which in part explains the meandering path.

I will quickly dispatch with the first two questions Gil and Risam pose us. What did I need? An online edition of some sort so that students could have something to point to when they completed their work with me. What did I have? I was already aware of the Jekyll static site generator and the Ed theme for minimal editions, and it seemed natural to use it after making a handful of modifications to suit the features of correspondence. My troubles began with the second two questions, which in my experience really speak to the decision making aspects of the project plan. What must we prioritize? And what are we willing to give up?

As project director, I was highly motivated to learn several things myself in addition to teaching students. And I lacked the typical project management constraints that would have forced me to make binding decisions sooner. First, I have no real "client" unless it is the student encoders themselves, which switches the focus from outputs to processes. And second, this project has no funding (funders typically require strict timelines). When I published the first letter anthologies to the web, I made a decision to replicate the structure of the archival collection itself, which is organized into files of correspondence associated with individual alumni. This structuring choice also made sense from pedagogical perspective. It is easy to assign an alumnus to one or more students so that they can spend time with a single person's handwriting and learn more about them through archival and genealogical research. However, this choice eventually posed an challenge for online navigation, since access by alumnus name was meaningless to most readers. At an NEH institute on "Advanced Digital Editing," I was encouraged to create wireframes for various possible interfaces. At the time, I had the institute's chosen platform, the very much not minimal eXist-db, in mind when I drew these images, showing access by location, subject, and date. Location information struck me as important to keep, since there are many locations mentioned in the letters that are training camps throughout the US and Canada, and of course sites along or near the Western Front, and which would not be especially familiar to most readers. Consequently, part of my learning would be to extract location information from the `correspDesc` elements and visualize them in an online map, preferably using open source software. I was also very attached to the idea of subject access to individual letters, which would mean breaking up my letter anthologies by individual letters classed by subject. I had no good idea of how to accomplish this without a database, which was not an option for this project.

{% include gallery caption="Wireframes" class="full" %}

One of the felicitous aspects of my participation in that NEH institute was a realization that I had to cede some control of the edition to the student interns working with me. I did not myself have all the answers, and it was quite possible that they would have better, more actionable ideas. Madija Maajid, an intern who was a computer science major, listened to all my thoughts and hopes for subject access, and my exhortation to avoid databases, and created a prototype that kept the primary access by alumnus but added secondary access by subject. This solution did not require a radical reorganization of the existing edition. She used only JavaScript, HTML, and CSS.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/madiha_subject-tags.png" alt="Maajid's prototype with subject tags" caption="Maajid's prototype with subject tags." %}

Maajid also created a more image-friendly mock-up of the interface, which I have yet to implement in Jekyll/ed.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/madiha_alumni-view.png" alt.png="Maajid's image-based interface mockup" caption="Maajid's image-based interface mockup." %}

Following her lead, I gave up a location-based interface and instead added a Leaflet map only to those letter anthologies where it made good sense (example: Ainsworth).

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/ainsworth-map.png" alt="Locations of correspondents and places mentioned in correspondence associated with Captain Ainsworth" caption="Locations of correspondents and places mentioned in correspondence associated with Captain Ainsworth." %}

Some alumni moved about the United States, France, and elsewhere, while others stayed in the same location for their whole war; the latter men didn't need maps. The scope of the navigation issue, and the required technologies, seemed to be narrowing, which was progress. That left the challenge of adding subject classification to the encodings themselves. In a first pass, the students and I use the Hypothesis annotation tool to make a preliminary assignment of subjects with links to Library of Congress authorities.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/hypothesis-annotations.png" alt.png="First pass of subject classification using Hypothesis" caption="First pass of subject classification using Hypothesis." %}

Of the many potential themes to highlight, we try to seek the ones descriptive of individuals as well as ones with the potential to carry over to other anthologies, but no more than 20 subjects per individual letter anthology. We use Hypothesis to highlight the segment of the letter that is about that subject. In a second step, we add the subjects to the encodings themselves via a `keywords` element in the `teiHeader` and within the letter divs. We are using something of a shortcut here and adding the subjects to the `@ana` attribute inside of the opening tag of the letter `div`. Compare this approach to that of Kinship & Longing: Keywords for Black Louisiana.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/wsb-subjects.png" alt.png="War Service Bureau subjects" caption="War Service Bureau subjects." %}

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/kinship-longing.png" alt.png="Kinship and Longing keywords" caption="Kinship and Longing keywords." %}

In terms of textual evidence, the Kingship & Longing approach is preferable because the editors keep their `//seg/@ana` encoding attached to the sentences that inspired them. Their commitment to a minimal edition is manifested in their choice of only four keywords across the documents. I couldn't commit to so few subject terms, but I did cut a corner on the placement of the `@ana` attributes, which saves considerable time. On the front end, with the addition of some JavaScript, the subjects become clickable buttons that open and close the letter anthologies like an accordion, alleviating somewhat the issue of the overly long web pages.

- `<seg ana="#stuff">` of Black Louisiana as compared to `<div type="letter" ana="#stuff">` of my edition. Prior approach is better in the sense that it keeps the encoding attached to the textual evidence. Mine is simpler and saves some time, even if it allows interface considerations to influence encoding choices (not generally advisable).

In summary

- priorities
- things given up
- take-aways: 1) friction okay, ideally both 

What are the take-aways?

- there is a tension between minimalism (editorial or computational) and good user experience. Note that in the long list of minimals, no one mentioned "minimal friction," because there is often some user friction with minimal interfaces. Ok because these are not commercial websites. A certain amount of friction is okay on academic websites. the trick is perhaps finding an elegant balance between friction and user friendliness.
- minimalism as approach felt like a straight jacket. meant giving up some personal learning objectives. but also seriously useful as an heuristic. Just because I could visualize letter metadata in all kinds of ways did not mean that I should. Location access did not make sense for all. The war theme and the interpretive lense of trauma and disability required a respectful sobriety and simplicity
- resisting sprawl and giving up what you want is heartbreaking, but necessity is a mother.... and all that. A post-hoc rationalization, but minimalism and the war theme vibe with each other. I did not need all that. Sobriety is right for some topics.
- finishing, at least provisionally, is ... ? important for institutional validation b/c libraries only celebrate outputs. but also confidence building for the editor. there is some catharsis in documenting tradeoffs, as I have done here with you today.

## Works cited

Dombrowski, Quinn. 2022. “Minimizing Computing Maximizes Labor.” _Digital Humanities Quarterly_ 16 (2). <http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/16/2/000594/000594.html>.

Giannetti, Francesca. 2019. “‘So near While Apart’: Correspondence Editions as Critical Library Pedagogy and Digital Humanities Methodology.” _The Journal of Academic Librarianship_ 45 (5): 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2019.05.001.

Hughes, Joel. 2016. “Minimal Definitions - Notes.” Minimal Computing (blog). October 7, 2016. <http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/07/minimal-definitions-notes/>.

McGann, Jerome. 2001. “Beginning Again: Humanities and Digital Culture, 1993-2000.” In _Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World Wide Web_, 1–19. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

Risam, Roopika, and Alex Gil. 2022. “Introduction: The Questions of Minimal Computing.” _Digital Humanities Quarterly_ 16 (2). <https://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/16/2/000646/000646.html>.

Vanhoutte, Edward. 2009. “Every Reader His Own Bibliographer – An Absurdity?” In _Text Editing, Print and the Digital World_, edited by Kathryn Sutherland and Marilyn Deegan. Farnham, England: Ashgate.
